<!-- (c) https://github.com/MontiCore/monticore -->

# MontiCore 3-Level License model 

[MontiCore](http://www.monticore.de) is a language workbench for an efficient 
development of domain-specific languages (DSLs). 
To prevent too many different public versions of the library itself, it 
is partly published under LGPL.

To be usable in commercial and any other forms of projects, the finally 
generated code is, however, completely freely available. 
Three levels of licenses are needed.

## MontiCore 3-Level License on files (informal description)

Summary: This project is freely available software; you can redistribute 
the MontiCore language workbench according to the following rules.

Details: The MontiCore Languag Workbench deals with three levels of code 
(MontiCore, tool derivates, product code). Each with different 
licenses: 

* *Product code*: when you use a MontiCore tool derivate to generate 
code, the generated code is absolutely free for each form of use 
including commercial use without any license. 

* *Tool derivate*: when you derive a tool using the MontiCore language 
workbench, then you mention that it is a MontiCore derivate. There is 
no other restriction. (BSD 3 Clause license) 

* *MontiCore adaptations*: you may also freely adapt MontiCore itself, 
but then you have to mention MontiCore AND the resulting code is to be 
pushed back into this LPGL repository (LGPL license). 

As a consequence using MontiCore during development is rather flexible 
and the final products do not have any restriction.

If questions appear e.g. on building an interpreter, please contact 
monticore@se-rwth.de. 


## General disclaimer

(Repeated from the the BSD 3 Clause license): 

This software is provided by the copyright holders and contributors
"as is" and any expressed or implied warranties, including, but not limited
to, the implied warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular
purpose are disclaimed. In no event shall the copyright holder or
contributors be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, special,
exemplary, or consequential damages (including, but not limited to,
procurement of substitute goods or services; loss of use, data, or
profits; or business interruption) however caused and on any theory of
liability, whether in contract, strict liability, or tort (including
negligence or otherwise) arising in any way out of the use of this
software, even if advised of the possibility of such damage.


## Included Software

This product includes the following software:

* [AntLR](http://www.antlr.org/)
* [FreeMarker](http://freemarker.org/)

## License overview 

The MontiCore Languag Workbench deals with three levels of code:

* (Level 3) MontiCore: the main libary constituting the LWB,

* (Level 2) tool derivates, that are to a large extent generated by the MontiCore 
    LWB, and

* (Level 1) product code that is finally generated by tool derivates.
    This also includes analytical results, thus as results of consistency 
    checks, code smells, test infrastructures, etc.

Each level has its own and different license: 

* (Level 3) MontiCore: the main LWB components are published under the 
LGPL license (see [LGPL V3.0](https://github.com/MontiCore/monticore/tree/master/00.org/Licenses/LICENSE-LGPL.md)).

* (Level 2) Tool derivate: when a tool is derived using the MontiCore 
language workbench, then the result falls under the BSD 3 Clause license 
(see [BSD-3-Clause](https://github.com/MontiCore/monticore/tree/master/00.org/Licenses/LICENSE-BSD3CLAUSE.md)).

* (Level 1) Product code: when a MontiCore tool derivate is used to 
generate code, the generated code is absolutely free for each form of use 
including commercial use without any license and thus without any restriction 
from MontiCore itself. 


As a consequence using MontiCore during development is rather flexible 
and the final products do not have any restriction.

Please note that the developers of tools may impose their own form of 
restrictions i.e. licenses on their tools respectively the results
generated by these tools.

## MontiCore 3-level License on Files 

This repository for the MontiCore language workbench contains three 
kinds of artifacts: 

* Java-files that are executed in the MontiCore LWB. They are under 
LGPL licence.

* Java-files that belong to the runtime environment (RTE) and are thus 
copied to the generated code. They are under BSD 3 Clause license.

* Templates executed during generation. They are also under BSD 3 
Clause license, because parts of them are copied to the generated code. 

As a result, a tool derivate (level 2) does not contain any LGPL code, 
but only BSD 3 Clause code. Executing the tool derivate then 
produces completely free code (level 1).

If questions appear e.g. on using MontiCore itself in a product
or building an interpreter, please contact monticore@se-rwth.de. 

## Underlying Licenses 

The MontiCore 3 Level license is built on:

* [LGPL V3.0](https://github.com/MontiCore/monticore/tree/master/00.org/Licenses/LICENSE-LGPL.md) 

* [BSD-3-Clause](https://github.com/MontiCore/monticore/tree/master/00.org/Licenses/LICENSE-BSD3CLAUSE.md) 

## Further Information

* see also [**MontiCore Reference Manual**](http://www.monticore.de/)

* [MontiCore project](../../README.md) - MontiCore


